GHC 9.12 and cabal 3.14 release announcement (#10)
haskell/blog.haskell.org: content/ghc-9.12-cabal-3.14/index.md

+++
title = "GHC 9.12 & cabal 3.14 releases"
date = 2024-12-22
[taxonomies]
authors = ["Hécate"]
categories = ["Cabal", "GHC"]
tags = ["Release"]
+++

> To conclude the year 2024, the GHC and Cabal teams are happy to announce the release of GHC 9.12 and cabal 3.14.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To conclude the year 2024, the GHC and Cabal teams are happy to announce the releases of GHC 9.12 and cabal 3.14.
```

<!-- more -->

Here are some highlights:

## GHC 9.12

### Language Extensions

> This release brings its lot of new and exciting extensions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release brings many new and exciting extensions:
```
"its lot of" was wrong anyway; "a lot of" would be more correct, but feels too casual for a release announcement.

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

Author: I thought "lot" as a noun could be used, like in the sentence "The lot includes samples of different products."

Reviewer: It can be, but this is not at all a common usage; "lot" there usually refers to a shipment. I'm aware of a few Commonwealth idioms using it that way, but those don't seem to really fit here either.

Author: Got it, thanks!

Reviewer: Someone who speaks British/Commonwealth English might be able to add more. I'd avoid it just because it looks fairly odd to American English speakers.

Reviewer 2: In contemporary American English "a lot" is informal for "many". I'm not a native but I write texts for a job. I'd suggest using "many" in release notes and alike.

> * [Multiline string literals][MultilineStrings] to spread a piece of text over several lines;

Reviewer 3: Not like it was impossible before, so probably needs to be unpacked for readers with more details. CC @brandonchinn178

Reviewer 4: Sure  something like "to write string literals with newlines kept verbatim, enabling multiline strings without the need for string gaps and literal `\n` characters"?

Reviewer: I considered commenting on that, but decided that a proper description might swamp the rest of the release announcement. Not that some of the other ghc changes don't.

Reviewer 2: I think it's exactly at the right level of detail now.

Reviewer 3: The art of release announcement is to be both precise and concise. If we leave it as is, someone can easily quote it as a proof that Haskell had no multiline literals before 2024 and one will have hard time to prove otherwise. I think @brandonchinn178's suggestion is good.

* [Or-Patterns][OrPatterns], allowing you to match on several patterns in a single `case` branch:

```haskell
data Sweet = Cupcake | Liquorice | Cookie | Raisins

-- Without Or-Patterns
tasty Cupcake = True
tasty Cookie = True
tasty _ = False

-- With Or-Patterns
tasty (Cupcake; Cookie) = True
tasty (Liquorice; Raisins) = False
```

* [NamedDefaults][NamedDefaults] allows you to create type defaulting declarations for literals other than for the `Num` class. This mechanism is used to make sure that in the expression `print (6 + 7)`, the multiplication gets a concrete type like `Integer`, `Int` or `Double`, instead of the vague  `Num a => a`.  
You can now apply this mechanism to other typeclasses, like:

```haskell
default IsString (Text, String)
```

> Which means that in a module with [`OverloadedStrings`][OverloadedStrings], string literals `"like this"` will default to [`Text`][Text] instead of a vague polymorphic type.

Reviewer 3: "instead of triggering an error about polymorphic type".

### Base Library

* Improvements to backtraces and exceptions. Lots of them.

#### ⚠️ Deprecations

> * The deprecation cycle of [GHC.Pack][GHC.Pack] has come to an end. Goodbye!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The deprecation period for [GHC.Pack][GHC.Pack] has come to an end. Goodbye!
```
Sorry, missed this one earlier.

* [GHC.Desugar][GHC.Desugar] will be removed in GHC 9.14.

### Code Generation

* Experimental support for the [RISC-V Platform](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/16783);

> * SIMD! In the x86: Most floating-point operations and some integer vector operations are supported 128-bit vectors **without LLVM**. [Get in touch](https://matrix.to/#/#ghc:matrix.org) to help with this effort

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SIMD! On x86, most floating-point operations and some integer vector operations are supported for 128-bit vectors **without requiring LLVM**. [Get in touch](https://matrix.to/#/#ghc:matrix.org) to help with this effort
```

Reviewer 3: The crux of the effort was to support vector operations in the native code generator (NCG) instead of LLVM only. Whether NCG actually compiles them to SIMD instructions on x86_64 / NEON on aarch64 / etc. is somewhat secondary (also obviously very important in practice).

I'd say "Vectorised operations are now supported by GHC native code generator and no longer require a separate compilation with LLVM".

Reviewer: Right, that was what I was attempting to say.

Author: Does the suggestion still stand? I'm not sure I understand the distinction you're making @Bodigrim, since in my understanding (and I could be very well wrong), vector operations are ultimately tied to SIMD. And the release notes item says:

> SIMD support has been added to the X86 native code generator. For the time being, only 128 bit wide vectors are supported, with most floating-point operations implemented, together with a few integer vector operations. Other operations still require the LLVM backend. Contributors welcome!

* You can try the new experimental [`-fobject-determinism`][-fobject-determinism] flag to enable deterministic object code generation.

#### ⚠️ Deprecations

> * Support 32-bit Windows & macOS/iOS has been dropped;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support for 32-bit Windows and macOS/iOS has been dropped;
```

Reviewer 2: Is it "MacOS" (with capital M)?

Reviewer 3: The official spelling has changed in 2016 to the lower case, e. g., ["macOS Sequoia"](https://www.apple.com/uk/macos/macos-sequoia/).

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

> * As a result, friendship with the `stdcall` calling convention for FFI is ended. Now `ccall` is your best friend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* As a result, friendship with the `stdcall` calling convention for FFI has ended. Now `ccall` is your best friend.
```

Reviewer: Hm, actually don't we want to recommend `CApiFFI` and `capi`, come to think of it? It goes back to 7.6.1, and I would argue that it's nearly mandatory since ghc switched to generating asm rather than C.

Reviewer 3: It's not like you can replace `stdcall` with `ccall` and keep compiling on 32-bit Windows: the support for Win32 ended, thus `stdcall` serves no purpose any longer.

Reviewer: True, but that also rules out the recommendation for `ccall`. In any case, I think the deprecation period for 32-bit Windows ending makes that moot: if you want to continue using it you must use an older ghc, which will still support `stdcall`.

Reviewer: TBH I never understood why Microsoft chose to use the Pascal calling convention when nobody to speak of was using a Pascal compiler to write programs for Windows. Yes, strictly speaking it has some advantages, but they're outweighed by the added complexity of needing to switch calling conventions for system APIs.

Author: @bgamari @andreaspk what's the recommended phrasing here? Should we steer users away from `ccall` and directly to `capi`, or is `ccall` a good intermediate step when they migrate away from `stdcall`?

Author: I'll settle for `ccall`.

* You can now compile projects dynamically with profiling enabled. The following options are now available:
  * cabal.project: `profiling-shared: <Boolean>`;
  * cabal file: `ghc-prof-shared-options` for passing options when building in profiling dynamic way;
  * Command-line arguments: `--enable-profiling --enable-executable-dynamic`.

* [New GHC options and extensions](https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/9.12.1/docs/users_guide/9.12.1-notes.html) are supported.

* New build type: Hooks. This build type, intended to eventually replace the Custom build type, integrates better with the rest of the ecosystem (cabal-install, Haskell Language Server).

* The experimental `haddock-project` command supports sub-components.

### Changed

* `cabal init` remembers the chosen language within current session (`Haskell2010`, `GHC2021`, etc.).

> * `cabal check` will warn about the insecure `git://` protocol in source-repository.

Reviewer: As [Oleg noted](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/10659), this is not a warning but an error.

* Enable recompilation avoidance during Haddock generation.

* Clarify error message when `pkg-config` is not found.

* Print out which project file(s) we are using.

### Fixed

> * The `--promised-dependency` flag now accepts the version of a package in the package name. Previously you could only call it with an argument like `void=void-0.5.8`.

Reviewer 3: Up to you, but at this point Cabal's part of the announcement dives much deeper into minor details than GHC's part.

Author: That's how the Cabal team decided to advertise this release: https://hackmd.io/jEZNhFoNRGGN1nNQxf2QzA

I can do some editing but ultimately everyone involved agreed to do it like this.

Now, it is possible to write: `--promised-dependency=void-0.5.8=void-0.5.8`.

* Always pass `ghc-options` to GHC.

* Enhance error detection for cabal root project files, including broken symlinks.

> * Don't pass `--coverage-for` for non-dependency libs of testsuite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Don't pass `--coverage-for` for non-dependency libs of a testsuite.
```

+++

> title = "GHC 9.12 & cabal 3.14 releases"

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't it be either `Cabal` or `cabal-install`? Seems odd to choose lower case.

Author: Just like it's not written `ghc` but GHC, it's the name of the project, not the name of the binary (see also the difference between GHCup and ghcup).

* [Or-Patterns][OrPatterns], allowing you to match on several patterns in a single `case` branch:

```haskell
data Sweet = Cupcake | Liquorice | Cookie | Raisins

-- Without Or-Patterns
tasty Cupcake = True
tasty Cookie = True
tasty _ = False

-- With Or-Patterns
tasty (Cupcake; Cookie) = True
tasty (Liquorice; Raisins) = False
```

* [NamedDefaults][NamedDefaults] allows you to create type defaulting declarations for literals other than for the `Num` class. This mechanism is used to make sure that in the expression `print (6 + 7)`, the multiplication gets a concrete type like `Integer`, `Int` or `Double`, instead of the vague  `Num a => a`.  
You can now apply this mechanism to other typeclasses, like:

```haskell
default IsString (Text, String)
```

Which means that in a module with [`OverloadedStrings`][OverloadedStrings], string literals `"like this"` will default to [`Text`][Text]
instead of triggering an error about a polymorphic type.

### Base Library

* Improvements to backtraces and exceptions. Lots of them.

#### ⚠️ Deprecations

* The deprecation period for [GHC.Pack][GHC.Pack] has come to an end. Goodbye!

> * [GHC.Desugar][GHC.Desugar] will be removed in GHC 9.14.

Reviewer 5: What does this actually mean that 'a deprecation period' has ended? It's not crystal clear whether it means the deprecation was cancelled, the module was removed in 9.14, the module was previously removed before 9.14 or whether it will now get removed, after 9.14 was released. The valediction 'Goodbye' is cute but unnecessary, it would be better to just plainly state that the module is not available in 9.14.

I think it would be better to avoid colloquial or memey language like e.g. the '[friendship has ended, now best friend](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/friendship-ended-with-mudasir)' meme. It's culture specific and unnecessary, hasn't traditionally been used (at least not according to [releases](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/releases)) and I don't understand why now is the time to start using memes.
